---
title: Classification of subgroups of symmetric group S4
category: Mathematics
excerpt: |    
  This article tries to identify the subgroups of symmetric group S4 using theorems from undergraduate algebra courses.
feature_image: "https://unsplash.it/1300/400?random"
---

This article tries to identify the subgroups of symmetric group S4 using theorems from undergraduate algebra courses.

<!-- more -->

# Basic Fact 

Below we will use the cycle notation to denote subgroup elements.  
$$S_4$$ has $$4!$$ elements. Categorize them by cycle patterns, and we get,  
$$
\begin{array}
{c|c|c}
Cycle \ Pattern	       & No. \ of \ elements & Order \\
\hline
(1,): id.	       & 1 \ elem	& (ord(e)=1)  \\
(2,1,1):(1,2),(1,3)... & 6	& (ord(\alpha)=2)   \\
(3,1):  (1,2,3),(1,3,2)... & 8	& (ord(\beta)=3)  \\
(2,2):  (1,2)(3,4)...     & 3	& (ord(\gamma)=2)  \\
(4):    (1,2,3,4)...      & 6	& (ord(\delta)=4)   \\
\end{array}
$$
    
# Classification  

From Lagrange's Theorem, nontrivial proper subgroups of $$S_4$$ should be of order p $$\mid$$ 24 for some integer $$p$$, i.e., $$p = 2,3,4,6,8$$ or 12.  

### 1.Subgroups of order 2  

$$H \cong \mathbb{Z_2}$$, which is equivalent to $$H = <\sigma>$$ for some $$\sigma$$, where ord($$\sigma$$)=2. Thus $$S_4$$ has 9 subgroups:$$\lbrace <\alpha> \rbrace \cup \lbrace <\gamma> \rbrace$$.  

### 2.Subgroups of order 3   

$$H \cong \mathbb{Z_3}$$, which is equivalent to $$H = <\sigma>$$ for some $$\sigma$$, where ord($$\sigma$$)=3. Thus $$S_4$$ has 8 subgroups:$$\lbrace <\beta> \rbrace$$.  

### 3.Subgroups of order 4

The class equation (or just simple reasoning) tells us that any subgroup $$H$$ of order 4 is abelian, and thus the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups tells us $$H \cong \mathbb{Z_4}$$ or $$H \cong \mathbb{Z_2} \times \mathbb{Z_2}$$.  Next we try to find all subgroups by enumerating all cases.  

#### Case 1: $$H \cong \mathbb{Z_4}$$   

From cycle patterns, we know that there are 3 cyclic subgroups. (Note that not 6 subgroups: $$<1,2,3,4> = <1,4,3,2>$$ and so on.)  

#### Case 2: $$H \cong \mathbb{Z_2} \times \mathbb{Z_2}$$   

Denote $$H= \lbrace id,a,b,c \rbrace$$, then $$ord(a)=ord(b)=ord(c)=2$$, and $$a*b=c,a*c=b,b*c=a$$.  
Consider the conjugacy class $$ \lbrace \alpha \rbrace$$ and $$ \lbrace \gamma \rbrace$$:
###### 1. $$H\backslash \lbrace e \rbrace \subset \lbrace \alpha \rbrace$$:  
 &ensp; None of such subgroup exists.(The set is not closed.)  

###### 2. $$H\backslash \lbrace e \rbrace \subset \lbrace \gamma \rbrace$$:  
  &ensp; $$H^{(2)} = \lbrace e \rbrace \cup \lbrace \gamma \rbrace$$, which is a nontrivial proper abelian (thus normal) subgroup of $$S_4$$.  
###### 3. $$H\backslash \lbrace e \rbrace \not\subset \lbrace \alpha \rbrace$$ and $$H\backslash \lbrace e \rbrace \not\subset \lbrace \gamma \rbrace$$:  
 &ensp; There are three subgroups, where one element is from {$$\gamma$$} and the other two nontrivial elements are from {$$\alpha$$} correponding to the two adjacent transposition from the element. For example, $$ \lbrace id,(1,2)(3,4),(1,2),(3,4) \rbrace$$.  
  
### 4.Subgroups of order 6

$$2=p \mid 2=3-1=q-1$$, thus we cannot claim using corollary to Sylow's Theorem that the subgroup is abelian. However, as no element of $$S_4$$ is of order 6, thus $$S_4$$ has no abelian subgroup of order 6 by FTFAP.   
Using brute force approach or semidirect product $$H$$ of order 2 and a normal subgroup $$N$$ of order 3, we may claim that $$H=S_3$$ up to isomorphism. Thus $$S_4$$ has four subgroups of order 6.

### 5.Subgroups of order 8

Subgroups of order 8 are 2-Sylow subgroups of $$S_4$$.  Sylow's third theorem tells us there are 1 or 3 2-Sylow subgroups. Case $$r=1$$ can be ruled out, otherwise $$H$$ is a normal subgroup in $$S_4$$, but there is no such union(group) of conjugacy classes whose cardinality is 8. Thus $$r=3$$.  

<br />
H is not normal in $$S_4$$, thus H is not abelian. Lemma to Sylow's First Theorem gives us that center of H, Z, satisfies $$Z \cong \mathbb{Z_2}$$ and $$G/Z \cong \mathbb{Z_2} \times \mathbb{Z_2}$$. Refer back to subgroups of order 4(Section 3.2), we may simply use composition of $$H^{(2)}$$ and $$\alpha$$ to get the three subgroups, e.g., $$\lbrace H^{(2)}, (1,2) H^{(2)}\rbrace$$.  

### 6.Subgroups of order 12  

$$[G:H]=2$$, thus $$H^{(1)}$$ is a normal subgroup in $$S_4$$. Check the cardinality of conjugacy classes, we can get, there exists only one subgroup of order 12, i.e., $$ \lbrace e \rbrace \cup \lbrace \beta \rbrace  \cup \lbrace \gamma \rbrace $$.  
In fact, $$H^{(1)} \cong A_4$$ the alternating subgroup: elements of $$H^{(1)}$$ are even permutations.  

# Discussion  

### 1. $$S_4$$ is a solvable group.

Generate the commutator subgroup sequence, and we can get, $$S_4 = H^{(0)} \supset H^{(1)} \subset H^{(2)} \supset H^{(3)} = \lbrace e \rbrace $$.  

### 2. Subgroup lattice of $$S_4$$
{% include figure.html image="https://weihaocao.com/assets/images/S4.jpg" caption="Subgroup Lattice" %}

